# traffic

Hypothesis: Sabbath observance affects traffic patterns in the New York area. Additionally, traffic patterns can be used to estimate Sabbath observance.

I began with the following data:

- MTAHourlyTraffic.tsv – “Hourly Traffic on Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA) Bridges and Tunnels: Beginning 2010” – from data.ny.gov. This file contains fields Plaza ID, Date, Hour, Direction, Cars – E-ZPass, and Cars – Toll, in other words, the total number of cars, separated by EZPass and Toll, passing over each of 10 MTA bridges and tunnels, going in both directions, for every hour of every day from 2010 through 2018. I also included with my files the MTA dictionary that describes what the values in the dataset refer to. I copied select pieces of this dictionary into a file that I named plazakey so that I could easily reference it.
- sunsets.txt – Sunset times for each date from 2010 through 2018, from aa.usno.navy.mil/data/docs/RS_OneYear.php, rearranged and formatted in Notepad++ and Excel

I then analyzed it as follows:

1. I sorted the data so that I had only Friday afternoon traffic, split into separate folders for each plaza and direction. I calculated afternoon rush hours (calculated as the hour with the maximum total number of cars from all PM hours) for each day for each plaza and direction, and then analyzed that data to find that overall 3, 4, and 5 PM were the most common rush hours, all significantly more common than other times (see RHfrequencies.txt). From the sorted traffic data, I found a weighted average of what time most cars were driving, computed by multiplying the number of cars at 3, 4, and 5 PM by 15, 16, and 17 respectively (the corresponding times on a 24-hour clock) and then dividing the result by the total number of cars from 3-5 PM. This formula yields a time that is a more precise representation of when the most cars are driving than the rush hour I calculated previously, because rush hour was measured rounded to the nearest hour. I also created a copy of the sunset file with only Friday sunsets times.

2. I measured the Pearson correlation coefficient, the square root of the amount of the variability in one variable that seems to be explained by the variable that it is correlated with, for the data from step 1, correlating Friday sunset times with Friday averaged rush hour times for each plaza and direction. I found that for some plazas and directions there was no recognizable correlation, but for others there was a high correlation between sunset and Friday traffic patterns. These correlation values are listed in the file correlations.txt. (Pearson correlation coefficient values in the range of 0.1 < | r | < .3 are generally assumed to represent a slight correlation, 0.3 < | r | < .5 represents a moderate correlation, and | r | > .5 represents a strong correlation.) I calculated correlation coefficients similarly for Tuesdays (chosen as a “random” weekday) and found that for every plaza and direction the correlation between sunset and traffic patterns was greater on Fridays than on Tuesdays except for a few plazas and directions by which both the Friday correlation coefficient and the Tuesday correlation coefficient were small (see file FvsT.txt). The graph called TandF.pdf shows Friday sunset times (blue), Friday averaged rush hours (green), and Tuesday averaged rush hours (red) for one plaza and direction – The Marine Parkway-Gil Hodges Memorial Bridge heading outbound (from the Rockaways to Brooklyn), as an example of a bridge/direction with a high correlation coefficient between sunset times and Friday traffic (approximately 0.65). It is clear in this graph that as sunset becomes later and earlier, Friday rush hour times become later and earlier in parallel but Tuesday rush hours (correlation coefficient 0.20) do not. (Note: Data was not collected from plaza 5 from approximately May-August of 2017.)

3. I then calculated an approximation of what percent of each NYC borough is Jewish, using data from a 2011 jewishdatabank.org study of NYC Jewish populations and U.S. census data. (I could not find NYC population data for Seventh Day Adventists, also Sabbath observers, but the NYC Jewish population far outweighs the Seventh Day Adventist population.) I also attempted to calculate what percent of people in each borough are Sabbath-observant Jews, first by adjusting the previous result based on the percent of Jewish children aged 15-17 in each borough that attend Jewish day school and then by adjusting the previous result based on what percentage of the Jewish people in that borough are affiliated with a congregation (both from the same jewishdatabank.org study.) I correlated this data with the Friday sunset/traffic correlations from step 2 and found a strong correlation between the two (see file result.txt), with the highest Pearson correlation coefficient being an approximately 0.55 correlation coefficient from the data estimating Sabbath-observant population using day school attendance.

4. Taking this one step further, I calculated the step 3 correlations again, this time excluding plazas heading into Manhattan. I decided to do this because it is unlikely that cars coming into Manhattan on Friday afternoon are coming from work, as most people who live in Manhattan work in Manhattan. Recalculating the step 3 correlations using only data from the outer boroughs, I found even higher correlation coefficients (see file Mresult.txt.) The highest value was once again the one calculated using day school attendance to approximate Sabbath observance, this time with a correlation coefficient of approximately 0.62, a highly significant value. This correlation, of the Sabbath observant Jewish percentage of the destination borough's population versus the extent to which sunset affects traffic on Friday, is plotted in the graph OuterBoroughDaySchools.pdf.

These findings are highly significant. It is clear that traffic patterns in the outer boroughs of New York City are affected by Sabbath observance. These statistics are even more remarkable when one considers that people are generally more likely to leave work early on Fridays in the summer to take an extended weekend, making it even more unlikely that commuters would leave work earlier in the winter when sunset is earlier, as the correlations that I found demonstrate.
MTA should consider incorporating these findings to increase rush hour efficiency, perhaps adding more busses and trains earlier on Friday afternoons in the winter or switching the direction of reversible traffic lanes earlier, for example.

Note: All filenames beginning in “T” are the Tuesday counterparts of the same code for Fridays. All filenames beginning with “M” represent data for just the outer boroughs, excluding Manhattan.
